the following content is provided under
a Creative Commons license your support
will help MIT OpenCourseWare continue to
offer high quality educational resources
for free
to make a donation or to view additional
materials from hundreds of MIT courses
visit MIT opencourseware at ocw.mit.edu
all right so moving to today's handout
this is one of my favorite parts of the
course honestly when I first started
teaching 511 one I said transition
metals are rarely covered in intro
chemistry courses is it really necessary
to cover it here and I was told it
absolutely was it's one of the reasons
that a five on the AP exam is not good
enough that you have to take the
advanced standing exam because the
people who teach in organic chemistry
found that people who placed out of 511
one didn't do as well in their courses
people who took 511 one here so this is
one of the reasons and then I started
teaching it and I realized this is one
of the even though people haven't seen
it before and sometimes people get a
little scare it's actually one of the
most fun units so I absolutely love it
and hopefully you will love it by the
end people are like we never covered it
why are you coming it we're in chapter
16 it's fun
okay so transition metals
d-block metals because they have those
d-orbitals yes we're going back to
talking about orbitals again and they're
called transition metals because you
transition from this part of the
periodic table with your what kind of
orbitals s to this part of your periodic
table with your what kind of orbitals P
so they are the transition metals and
they're often really reactive and very
cool and many of them since we're on a
biological theme many of them are super
important in biology and I have some of
these written down in your notes but
here they are up here in the transition
metals you have a lot of metals that we
could not live without iron carries
oxygen to our blood very important
hemoglobin we talked about cobalt just
now that is the metal and vitamin b12 so
we know why that's important we have
zinc everywhere nickel is important for
bacteria not so much for us but bacteria
is important for us so therefore nickel
is important to us so all of these are
really important also this part of the
periodic table is part of the table that
people love
want to make pharmaceuticals or want to
make new kinds of electrodes or
batteries or all sorts of things there's
a bunch that are used as probes we
talked about imaging agents detecting
cancer and all sorts of different things
like that
many of these transition metals are used
in those probes and also in
pharmaceuticals and so this is this is
sort of a very rich part of the periodic
table where those d-orbitals allow for
properties that are incredibly useful
for our health and for doing all sorts
of stuff so I love this part again some
of the biological global cycling of
nitrogen we talked about nitrogen
fixation that triple bond it's really
hard to break nitrogen apart but
bacteria can do it it doesn't using
transition metals fixing carbon
hydrogenase if you want to make hydrogen
fuel cells that are more biological
again biology uses transition metals in
this making vitamins making
deoxynucleotides respiration
photosynthesis it's all due to
transition metals all right so we'll
start with just one example or one of
our in our own words on segments and
this focus is on nickel which is
something very important in bacteria and
this is actually an example from a
collaborative project between my lab and
course six and I know a lot of you are
thinking about being course six majors
so I thought I would tell you about some
research of Colin Stoll it's a course
six professor so he was doing some
computational analysis on these proteins
that were studying so many of you at
this point in the semester probably feel
like you might be getting an ulcer but
unless you have h pylori in your gut you
probably are not actually getting an
ulcer and you just take a little b12
you'll feel a lot better okay so here's
my name is Sarah Bowman and I am a
postdoctoral fellow at MIT I am working
on studying a protein from helical dr.
pol or E which is pathogenic bacteria
it's kind of ecological niche is in
mammalian stomachs
it's actually very difficult to treat
using antibiotics because a lot of times
when you're given antibiotics they're
gonna actually be broken apart by the
acidity of the stomach before they
actually ever get to killing the Gila go
back to Po Laurie
transition metals and biological systems
are actually really important they
increase the range of reactivity that
proteins and enzymes are able to access
nickel is a transition metal and it's a
transition metal that's actually fairly
rare and biological systems so one of
the big things that h pylori use this
nickel for is an enzyme called urease
urease requires something like 24 nickel
ions which is a lot urease is one of the
proteins that allows for a lot of
buffering capacity of the organism of
the h pylori organism the stomach pH is
very low so pH to something and this
bacteria has to swim through the stomach
and then colonize it and you know you
think that this stomach would just break
it apart like it breaks about your food
but in fact the bacteria itself has
mechanisms in place that allow it to
create buffers that allow it to move
through the stomach and live in the
stomach and one of those enzymes it's
really important for that is urease
in humans nickel as far as we can tell
is not essential for any enzymes
whereas in Helicobacter pylori for
instance nickel is an essential
transition metal and so a really
intriguing thing to kind of think about
is just whether we could somehow target
the the nickel requirement in this
organism and another bacteria that would
allow us to kill these pathogenic
bacteria while not doing anything that
would be harmful to humans so I liked
that video partly because it brings back
acid-base and buffers as well as talking
about transition metals and I love the
bacteria being attacked by by the acid
and then making a buffer and saving
itself it's awesome okay so one of the
reasons why these transition metals are
so powerful they can do so many things
is that they like to form complexes and
they have they like to form complexes
with small small molecules or ions and
those ions often will have a lone pair
of electrons and the metal wants that
electron density it wants the benefit of
that lone pair so when you have this
lone pair and that the metal will come
in contact with that lone pair and it
will make it very happy very happy metal
and we can think about this interaction
here as the donor atoms are called
ligands and now let's review something
we learned before about whether this is
a lewis acid or a lewis base then
okay ten more seconds
that's right so it's a lewis base so if
we put this up here donor add donor
atoms are called ligands which are lewis
bases and the lewis bases donate the
lone pair of electrons and again we can
think about the definition that we've
been more used to wear a base is taking
H+ it's accepting the proton from the
acid but there when it's taking H+ it's
taking H without its electrons so it's
actually donating its lone pairs to form
a bond and then we can think about lewis
acids so the acceptor atoms which are
our transition metals are lewis acids
they accept the lone pair and when an
acid that has a proton on it loses h+ it
is taking the electrons with it because
h+ is leaving without its electrons so
these definitions work but these are
sort of more broad definitions so here
are metals any of our transition metals
are going to be our acceptors or Lewis
acids and here are a bunch of ligands we
have water we have nh3 we have Co they
have lone pairs they can be donor atoms
and the ligands form complexes with the
metals and the kind of complexes there
coughing called coordination complexes
and that's a metal that's surrounded by
ligands and here's a little example a
metal in the middle and it has the
ligands around it so let's consider this
coordination complex now and think about
what this picture is telling us so we
have our coordination complex we have
cobalt in the middle and we have NH 3
groups as our donor ligands and here
this bracket indicates the overall
charge is +3 again the transition metal
is going to be the Lewis acid it's going
to be accepting the lone pairs from the
Lewis bases which are the ligands or the
donor atoms now we can think about a new
term called coordination number and
that's simply the number of ligands that
are bound to the metal so I see
number of six would indicate six ligands
make up what's called the primary
coordination sphere which is the things
that are bound directly to the metal so
CN numbers for transition metals range
from two to 12 but six is probably the
most common
so before we think about the shapes of
these molecules let's just look at the
notation for this so coordination
complex notation so I would write this
structure up here within brackets Cobalt
bracket nh3 you have parentheses around
nh3 there's six of those another bracket
here with a plus three charge indicating
the charge on everything this whole
structure but often coordination
complexes with a plus charge will have
counter ions around so there might be
say three chlorine minus ions around and
so that could be written like this
or it could be written like this if you
see CL 3 outside of those brackets it
means that there are counter ions so if
I looked at this I'd say nh3 is within
the brackets that means it's bound to
the cobalt so that would tell you
there's six things bound to the cobalt
the CL is outside that indicates it's a
counter ion there are three of them so
there are three counter ions which then
tells you the charge must be +3 all
right so there is our notation alright
so now we're back to thinking about
geometries so this is one of the things
I love about this part I feel like some
people and the course are just like new
topic new topic oh man when is the new
material going to end but you find you
get enough into chemistry and you start
revisiting topics you've already seen
before so this is great all right so
coordination number six we haven't maybe
heard coordination number six but that's
pretty easy to remember it's a number of
atoms bound what type of geometry is
this
you can just yell it out right so that's
octahedral geometry again the solid
triangles coming out indicate they're
coming out at you back dashes are going
back and we have our axial all right so
let's see how well you remember cn5
structures and you can keep this up here
and you can tell me what the name of
those two geometries are
alright let's take 10 more seconds and
here are structures and real life down
here people are this like I want to put
seesaw know that that is a that is the
parent geometry of seesaw but not seesaw
itself okay so we have the trigonal
bi-pyramidal and the square pyramidal so
I'm holding up the square pyramidal
right now and then we have the trigonal
because it's trigonal along here by
pyramidal so it's sort of like one
pyramid here one pyramid there so by
pyramidal and if I took off one and we
had a lone pair then we would get our
friend the seesaw okay next we have this
what's that one called square
planar yep and this one tetra can you
draw and now see a number of three what
is this one trigonal planar it's in a
plane kind of if I hold the bond so they
don't fall off and it's kind of trigonal
and then what about the last one
lennier okay and let's just run through
and think about the angles as well with
octahedral what are our angles 90
trigonal bi-pyramidal 90 and 120 that's
right so we have one 120 around here and
then the top parts were 90 okay they
have the square pyramidal 90 square
planar 90 tetrahedral 109.5 give credit
for 0.72 that's that's quite close
trigonal planar 120 and linear 180 right
so you're going to need to remember
these for this unit but that's okay cuz
you need to remember them for the final
anyway so it gives you a nice review
alright so got everyone so they got them
down could look up your old notes just
review alright
so coordination complexes also have
another name they can be called key
lates
just another name for coordination
complex so key lights can be the thing
but you can also say that the ligand
will chelate as another way of saying
that it will bind to a metal and it
combined with more than once with one or
more sites of attachment and the word
chelate frog comes from Klaus and I like
that picture I feel like yes these these
ligands coming in
like claws and binding that metal there
chelating that metal so there are
different names depending on how many
points of attachment they have and we
have what's known as monodentate dent
for dentist or tooth so that's one point
of attachment and I bet that without
having seen this material ever before
you can tell me what the rest of these
are what do you think by dentate means
to try dentate tetradentate accidente
thanks alright there's not one four five
but this is good so don't lose a point
on this I feel like sometimes people
lose a point on this in the exam you
knew it in class before I taught it you
know what I'd like somehow work
backwards so this is easy points right
here just remember on the exam wait a
minute maybe I already know this all
right so let's look at it some example
of chelating ligands that bind with
multiple points of attachment and the
first one we're kind of on a theme today
is vitamin b12 that we're gonna look at
so this is called the Koren ring cobalt
is in the middle and that ring binds
with four points of attachment so it is
a tetradentate ligand this corn ring
there is also an upper ligand which is
five-prime deoxyadenosine and a lower
ligand that's called dimethyl benzyl it
is all you don't need to know their
names overall it has six ligands in
octahedral geometry but the Corrin ring
is a very nice biological example of a
multi dentate ligand
heme would be the same i thought i would
show you this rotating around so you get
a better sense and tell you that this
structure of this vitamin was determined
by Dorothy Hodgkin who won the Nobel
Prize in 1964 for determining the
structure by crystallography and also
solving the structure of penicillin this
was the most complicated molecule to be
solved by crystallography
a lot of people said that technique
could never be used to do something that
big she showed that they were wrong in
terms of determining the structure of
penicillin it was during the war and
people wanted to make more penicillin
but they had no idea what the structure
was so they didn't know what to make and
she figured out the structure and it's a
weird-looking molecule so no one would
have guessed it without knowing the
structure so for her pioneering work in
in crystallography she won the Nobel
Prize
alright so vitamin b12 is one example of
a chelate another that's probably more
that you probably hear about the most
it's almost synonymous with the word
chelate is EDTA here is the EDTA
molecule and you see that it has lots of
lone pairs that are just dying to grab
on to a metal so we have six we have one
two three four five six six things that
are capable of chelating that metal and
so here is what the complex looks like
so the red oxygen can chelate
the green oxygen here can chelate
nitrogen here and in dark blue the other
nitrogen in dark blue here
light blue oxygen here and also the
purple oxygen so now why don't you tell
me what the geometry of this would be as
a clicker question
we're ready yeah ten more seconds should
be fast hopefully
yeah great 86% it is octahedral and
sometimes it's a little bit hard to see
that but I helped you out by drawing
those bonds and black that you needed to
look at so we have four that are in the
plane here one above and one below here
so that is octahedral geometry also how
many points of attachment
what kind of dentate ligand is this it's
hexadentate as well so it has as six six
points of attachment here
alright so EDTA is a really good metal
key later and part of the reason that it
is such an awesome metal key later is
because of entropy so we're back to
entropy again so the binding of EDTA to
the metal is entropically favored and
the reason for this is that metals that
are say in your body like if you happen
to eat some lead paint and that lead is
hanging out it's not just by itself it's
coordinating hopefully just water and
not to proteins in your body but when
you take some EDTA to to prevent your
lead poisoning one molecule of EDTA will
bind the metal and all of these waters
are going to be released so I have over
here some lead with a whole bunch of
little waters this is this is quite an
ordered system but if I take out all of
those waters here that's a lot more
entropy going on than what we had and
then you have one chelating ligand here
and that's a pretty simple system so
this is ordered this is disordered so
the binding of EDTA one EDTA releases
six water molecules and that makes that
makes it very favorable to do this and
because of that chelating molecules or
the chelate effect molecules that are
key lates like metal bound into EDTA are
usually stable because of this favorable
and Tropic effect this release of water
so the release of water the release of
increasing entropy drives that metal
chelation
and you sequester your metal which is
really good if you're trying to avoid
lead poisoning so I think this is a nice
example of our friend entropy driving a
reaction so a lot of you did really well
on the exam talking about factors of
Delta H and entropy and when you'd have
favorable Delta G's here's another nice
example where the chelate effect
explains why metal key lates are so
unusually stable all right so uses of
EDTA I already just told you one lead
poisoning all ambulances have EDTA in
case someone is eating some some lead
paint another thing that II D TAS used
for which I think is fun you should all
go check if you buy little packaged
goods and they have a long list of
chemical ingredients look for EDTA it's
often there and it says it's added for
freshness which means that bacteria need
metals you have EDTA EDTA sequester's
the metals so the bacteria can't live on
the food that you're eating so instead
of saying food additive added to kill
the bacteria that were otherwise growing
on your food they say added for
freshness and I do think that is an
improvement alright another thing we've
already talked about the importance of
cleaning bathtubs taquile calcium out of
bathtub scum you have EDTA or other
metal chelate and then I have my
favorite other example of the use of
EDTA
this favorite example is in Hollywood
the movie blade how do you kill a
vampire vampires drink what blood blood
has fire EDTA chelate iron so you get a
little dart and you have you can kind of
see them maybe up here they're filled
with liquid
that's EDTA
you shoot the vampire with EDTA and the
vampire just disappears
just kind of turns to sort of dust
because it's like mostly iron in the
iron gets chelated but it happens right
away but anyway I think that's cool yes
what a good way to kill a vampire
EDTA it's brilliant excellent use on
holiday on Hollywood's part for a dta
okay metal key lights all sorts of
potential values that they have okay so
when we're talking about coordination
complexes we're talking about geometries
sometimes the atoms can be arranged in
different ways and when you have these
geometric isomers they can have very
different properties so just look at an
example here it's a platinum compound a
platinum compound who is 2 NH 2 groups
and to chlorine groups and you could
arrange those in two different ways you
could put the NH 3 groups on one side
and the chlorine groups on the other
side and that would be sis these are
cysts to each other or you could put a
trans configuration where chlorine is
here and then the nether chlorine is
trans on the other side and the same
with this so sis platinum here is a
potent anti-cancer drug and it has to be
sis platinum because it binds to DNA and
the two bases of DNA displace these
chlorines so if they're not on the same
side it can't bind to the DNA and so
this prevents the cancer cells from
being repaired from damaging agents
trans platinum does absolutely nothing
that anyone knows so it's exactly the
same composition but because they are
different isomers from each other and I
have C over here different isomers of
each other and so chlorines on the same
side sis versus the trans have
completely different property
so sis platinum got a lot of fame
because it cured Lance Armstrong of
cancer Lance Armstrong now of course is
a much more controversial figure than he
was at the time but still he created an
amazing charity that hopefully is still
doing well despite some of his fall from
fame okay so another type of isomer are
called
optical isomers also called enantiomers
or chiral molecules and these are one
again you have the same composition but
they are non-superimposable they are in
fact mirror images of each other so if
my head was a mirror these would be
mirror images of each other
and I could try very hard to superimpose
them bringing the blue molecules over
here but then the green and the red
don't match you can come and try these
are in fact non-superimposable mirror
images from each other and sometimes
they can have very similar properties it
depends but if you put molecules like
that that are known as chiral chiral
molecules ie enantiomers
non-superimposable mirror images the
human body is very much of a chiral
environment you have enzymes designed to
bind things in a particular way so they
can have very very different properties
okay so we have to do some D electron
counting before we end today and I love
this because it's really pretty simple
to count D electrons and so we're going
to just take a look at some examples and
for this doing this part we're gonna
start using our friend the periodic
table again so and we need to find
oxidation numbers which which we just
talked about in the last in the last
unit so if we have a coordination
complex with Cobalt
and this cobalt has those six NH 3
groups and our +3 charge so this is the
complex that we have been talking about
let's now figure out what the oxidation
number of this is
and so this nh3 is neutral so that's
given as a hint
many of our ligands are going to be
neutral ligands so if that is zero what
is the charge on the cobalt plus three
now we're going to move use the rules of
D count so we have a D count we need to
look up the group number from the
periodic table which in this case is
nine then we have minus the oxidation
number so we have 9 minus 3 or six and
so this is a d6 system and that is all
there is to doing these counts so let's
just try another one so we heard about
nickel will do nickel nickel is
coordinated by carbon monoxide and there
are four of those so what is my charge
on the nickel going to be my oxidation
number of the nickel so what's my
overall charge of this complex zero co
is also going to be zero there's no
charge on co so what is the oxidation
number of nickel zero so then we can do
our D count the D count what is the
group number for nickel was it 10 um
this is like this is the kind of math
that always makes me very happy
zero 10 minus 0 is 10 so that is a d-10
system alright well do one more over
here and the next one is a clicker
question
gives me time to write
yeah all right let's just do 10 more
seconds
yep so here our overall charge is minus
one we have the chlorines are minus one
nh3 is zero water is zero so this has to
be plus 2 because plus 2 minus 3 is
minus 1 we have 9 minus 2 is 7 so it's a
d7 system all right so Wednesday
d-orbitals I cannot wait
yes all right ten seconds
okay does someone want to tell me why
that's the right answer
hey anybody we got we've got a nice
dangly thing for your keys or ID No
all right
so so here we're thinking about whether
things are better reducing agents or
better oxidizing agents and here we're
given two different redox potentials -
600 and - 300 so the one that is going
to be the the lower number is going to
be better at reducing other things it
wants to be oxidized itself and then we
can think about whether it's a favorable
process in terms of whether the thing
that should likes to reduce is actually
doing the reducing that's gonna make it
a spontaneous process all right so these
are the kinds of questions for the
oxidation reduction unit that we just
finished and this will be on exam four
which amazingly we just finished exam
and there's another one
so exam four is two weeks from today all
right arts from Friday sorry two weeks
from Friday all right so today we're
going to continue with this unit on
transition metals the next exam is going
to have oxidation reduction and
transition metals and a little bit of
kinetics kinetics is our last unit so
we're getting very close to the end of
the semester so we're finishing up the
handout from last time again we're back
to the periodic table we're thinking
about transition metals we're thinking
about that middle part of the periodic
table and so we're thinking about D
orbitals so there are five D orbitals
how many S orbitals are there one
how many PR Battelle's are there
and so d orbital's have five and we're
not going to talk about really anything
beyond d orbital's in this class and
frankly not very many people do but d
orbitals are amazing so we have to fit
them in alright so there are five D
orbitals and they're up here and you
need to be able to draw their shapes and
the bar for drawing the shapes is
actually pretty low so these are my
drawings that that I made and so if you
can you can probably do just about as
well alright so the the one that has the
most unusual shape is the D Z squared
and so it has its maximum amplitude
along the z axis and for this unit our z
axis is always going to be up and down
here Y is in the plane of the screen and
X is coming out towards you and also
going into the screen and so DZ squared
is this maximum amplitude along Z and it
also has a doughnut in the X Y plane and
so I also brought a little model of this
so here's DZ squared we have maximum
amplitude along the z axis up and down
and we have our little donut in our XY
plane so then we have d x squared minus
y squared which has maximum amplitude
along X and along Y and that would look
like this so we have our maximum
amplitudes that are right on axis so if
this is y axis and X is coming at
towards you those orbitals are pointing
right along that coordinate frame the
other three orbitals look a little bit
like DX squared minus y squared but
they're not on axis they're off axis
there in between the axes so we have D Y
Z it has its maximum amplitude 45
degrees off of the Y and the Z
axis so if this is z axis here there's
no maximum amplitude along here it's 45
degrees off so it's right in the middle
between the Z and the Y so DX Z has its
maximum amplitude along or 45 degrees
between X and Z so that would would be
pointing the other way and so I tried to
draw this keeping the reference frame
the same it's a little hard to see the
orbitals but it would be kind of this so
we rotate that around and so that's what
that would look like and then D X Y we
have maximum amplitude 45 degrees in
between the X and the y so X coming out
Y in the plane and so this is again a
little bit hard to draw if I drew it
absolutely perfectly and not tilted at
all you kind of wouldn't see anything
but that's what that would look like so
again the names of this it tells you
about the relationship between that that
orbital that maximum amplitude and the
axis that we have defined so it's this
is very important to know that these
guys are in between the axes right in
the middle 45 degrees and you'll see why
in a few minutes why that's important
okay so just to practice here are some
slightly better pictures of the orbitals
and this is the coordinate frame over
here and now we have the orbitals inside
that so again Z is going up Y is in the
plane of the screen and X is going back
and also coming out toward us so which
is this D orbital you can just yell it
out
yeah that's easy to remember that's the
unique looking one what about this one
think about this first think about the
plane so it's the XY plane and then is
it on or off axis so which one is this
yeah so this one is on axis you can see
the maximum amplitude of the orbital
pointing right along those axis so it's
right in the corners of that square
there and then what about this one down
here yeah
so that would be DX Y so it's in the XY
plane but it's 45 degrees off the axes
if it's in between the axes here and
what about that one right so we have
it's a long both Z and Y here and then
this last one which is drawn to kind of
come out towards you so that is along X
as well so that's D X Z and it's going
up along Z so you can look at the
coordinate frame which will try to keep
consistent and figure out whether ask
yourself is it on axis or off axis and
which plane is it in and that will allow
you to name them and also to draw them
so just to kind of get you give you more
of a three-dimensional sense there's
these little movies that I'll show you
now and so you can get a better sense of
that awesome doughnut it's going to make
you hungry they even colored it like a
really nice original doughnut that you
would get at Dunkin Donuts so that is in
the doughnut is in the XY plane and
these other lobes are along Z so now we
have d x squared minus y squared and you
can see that the maximum amplitudes
again are along the axes key there along
the axes here I don't know why it comes
out towards you and it wrote I didn't
yeah but it gives you a good
three-dimensional a sense of this all
right
so D X Y now again in the XY plane but
instead of being on
says it's 45 degrees off-axis you can
see I think in this really nicely it's
right between the axis but it's not
touching them the axes sort of separate
these orbitals and then we have X Z so
now we're going up along the z axis and
in the X plane and here it comes at you
again 45 degrees in between Z and X and
then our last one we have Y Z so the
shapes of those later three actually
even four of them are the same is just a
matter if they're on or off axis and
which plane they're in so this is not to
hard to draw alright so why is this
important why should we care exactly how
the the orbitals are oriented and the
reason that you should care about that
is because it can explain a lot of the
special properties of transition metals